I want to get that.
No, it's definitely not the booze talking.
He's not drunk, as a matter of fact.
Booze over many years can be strange things.
I wonder if the final of the final pages, is he with Andy or is he on the street?
I don't want to ask you to explain this.
I don't intend to explain that.
I don't believe we're asking novelists to explain novelists, but I think I'm still trying to get it.
I would say that the method is not in any way who is connected.
The method is to enter into the secret regions of any human being through
the unconscious, through conscious, through perception from outside, we see Francis behave in an objective way and on the surface.
Just the narrative gives us that.
Then you hear him speak, you hear him
talk, street argot.
Then you have the internal conscious mind at work with him, where he's remembering things, remembering somewhat in the argot of the street.
And then you slide into the poetry of the book, which is, as far as I'm concerned, the
the unconscious element of Francis, the way anybody's soul would speak to an individual.
And it's the things that a man like Francis would not be able to articulate consciously, but which we all have within us.
And I think that's what the writers
charged with exploring to enter into those regions that are not obvious, that are not journalistic, that are not superficial, that are not manners, that you try to get at the heart of any human being you write about.
And that's why I think Francis is my best
because I think I got closer to Francis than I ever got to anybody else.
And I think that's the real achievement.
Do you foresee leaving Albany at all in your fiction?
Or are you here to stay?
I could leave Albany, but I don't see any need to.
I wouldn't know where to go.
I have a couple of
books which i have a parallel book to quinn's book which i call quinn's book two or just quinn two and uh i feel that uh
I'll probably write about Germany at some point, because I spent some time in Germany, almost two years.
It could be that I'll be writing about that period, not in any autobiographical way, but just to use that experience, because I know a lot about it.
Likewise in Puerto Rico, I spent seven years there.
I could very easily
enter into some kind of story taking place for those years or in a temporary time.
I feel that wherever I go in any story, a field of Albany, that there will be probably some basis for it and that it will come out of one of the family connections or one of the
client of Marcus Gorman or I don't know.
It's hard to say.
Well, I mean, Albany then is more than setting.
It's almost a metaphor.
It's a microcosm.
It's everything that I need.
What was that word?
Microcosm.
The power's going.
I had to take my benefit together.
Okay.
But it's the same.
What's the difference whether you're writing about New York City or...
in Los Angeles and Beverly Hills, as you're talking about the spirit of the human being, and I really feel that that's the main thing, and no matter where I go, I find that the grounding here is not at all limiting, but there's a capacity in
in me at that stage when I begin to see a human being functioning in Albany, that something happens, something real comes to pass in the imagination and I believe it more than I would believe creating somebody poorest and
in Puerto Rico.
Who is the tourist?
I mean, what is his background?
Sooner or later, you have to... He came from somewhere.
You have to find out, even if you leave it out.
Like Hemingway said about...
The old man in the sea, yeah, could have made this.
You always know 90% more than what you put in your novel.
I'm sure you know any number of different things about Franny and Billy that we don't know about.
But I mean, the characters are real to you.
They've lived whole lives for you, maybe I'm assuming something.
Absolutely, you know, you can envision them doing things in different eras, growing old.
a younger playing ball, Francis playing ball, I can see him.
Billy as an old man, I can see him.
But I'm sure that these people did a lot of things that you know about that you didn't tell us.
Oh, worlds, absolutely.
You mentioned also in Albany that you couldn't write what you do, a wealthy one of my favorite writers about the pre-novel writing.
Well, that's what I'm sort of talking about with the Puerto Rican tourism novel.
If you're only going to deal with the dynamics of the love affair at Capri or the political involvement in San Juan, well, you might have a very good story.
I'm not going to say you can't do it.
Ron Hemingway, what he left out of his...
Novels, war novels, Farewell to Arms or The Home of the Beltals or The Sun Also Rises.
Those novels, there's very little history of Jake Barnes or Frederick Henry or Robert Jordan.
I mean, there's some few allusions here and there, but basically he deals with the contemporary moment that they're involved in.
And that's fine, whereas, to me, the contemporary moment is always colored by this historical baggage we carry with us constantly, unable to separate ourselves from it.
Why do you dedicate O Albany to people who used to think we hated the place where they grew up and took a second look?
to give your comment I don't know you seemed out quite thoroughly in the book but I think you're getting pulled out well the I you know I did write about my own feeling when I went away and I I was fearful when I came back that I was going to be trapped here and and I had a vision of it being a very limiting life and
that I would never really achieve what I was going to, what I wanted to achieve in writing, that I would be stuck in the backwater forever.
Well, after a while, I figured that that was a long-headed attitude, that it didn't make any difference where I lived, and I really didn't want to live in New York City.
or Chicago or anyplace else particularly.
I really wanted to live in Albany.
I bought this house when I came up.
I never wanted to move out of it.
I've been here 21 years now.
It's been a constant source of pleasure and it's given a way of life that can't be improved on Beverly Hills.
Franny Phelan, the trick is to live to beat the bastards.
Does this apply to life generally?
It does to me, as far as I'm concerned.
Just to stay alive, and if you can stay alive and keep working, that's a major achievement.
And sooner or later, you get to, you know, this ironic...
satisfaction you see all these various people who were obstacles in the past they become irrelevant if you just keep moving ahead in your own direction doing as well as you can i mean maybe you can die but if you don't die you get better
The epitaph for any hopes to carve one day in Helen is a huge one.
Helen Marie Archer, a great soul.
I think that in a way most all of your characters are great souls.
It's just maybe a more breaching, I don't know.
This is the type of character that you try to put together and develop regardless of what they are.
They're great souls.
part of your characterization.
No, I don't think that Francis and Helen are great souls in the same... I mean, I don't think that Lake Diamond's a great soul in the same sense that Francis and Helen are.
I think that they've kept faith with some kind of private identity, private morality that has allowed them to...
exist in a world that they never made, but a world of some spiritual achievement, nevertheless.
Black Diamond was not that.
It was a different thing, and maybe that's one of the problems I had
understanding him was that I couldn't profoundly sympathize with him because you just can't accept that cruelty the evil however charming a face it may have and it's an anomaly that you accept him at all but
Francis is no problem.
You know, anybody who rejects Francis rejects him on the grounds of his being a social outcast, a badly dressed, a repellent figure, but not for any moral reasons.
It's that we tend to shy away from failure and not want to associate ourselves with it.
Do you reread your own books?
I haven't read Legs.
I read Legs when I was rewriting the movie script.
About halfway through Billy Phelan as a movie script, and I've been reading that.
I had to read it and mark it to know what I was going to use, what I was going to reject.
And Ironweed, I...
I had to dip in and out of it occasionally.
I'm sure I'll be rereading it again when I get to the writing of that script.
So, you know, I'm not that far away.
I haven't... I don't know.
I think of these books as completed work.
Even The Ink Truck, I had a chance to...
to retool and I couldn't begin to go back and restructure my imagination with the same verve and the wildness that I had in 67, 68 when I was writing that thing.
I just don't think I'm the same person anymore.
Do you, when you're writing, do you see your writing whole, is it pretty well mapped out before you get into a improvisational artist?
No, I think the best thing about it is that you find things out as you go along, and that you surprise yourself all the time.
I mean, I have an enormous amount of information on Quinn's book now.
I've got a
a pie-safe up in my office and I'll show it to you if you want, which is a book in embryo.
I got a whole bookcase full of related books that I want to dip in and out of, books on the theatre, the Erie Canal, the Irish immigration politics in the 19th century.
I don't know where those things are going to take me.
I have the raw material and I have a decision already made on how I'm going to go in a certain direction, but the nuances are everything.
Every chapter has got to be a surprise, and it's a surprise.
letter by letter almost.
It's a surprise for yourself as well as the reader.
For me, it's got to surprise me.
I'm writing for me.
But is the reader there?
Well,
You say surprise.
I must have some surprise in the story as far as I'm concerned.
Something I might say, hey, I don't know where that came from, but I like it.
And suddenly that is the thing to develop that makes sense to me.
That's the story that I haven't read before or thought of before, and therefore it strikes me that maybe this is original and worth doing.
There's a thread there.
You want to talk about the reader?
Oh, the reader, yeah.
Certainly, I suppose the craft of writing is done with the reader in mind, in the sense that you want to make all your transitions very clear, you want to have an antecedent for everything, so there's no doubts about what the reader is reading, but as far as writing down or up or anything else, the reader... Well, I guess you're talking about accessibility, and I wonder, is James Joyce an accessible writer?
Tell me.
I don't think Finnegan's Wake is, but I was reading Ulysses yesterday for reasons of the article I'm writing.
It's a little Joyce-ian anecdote that I was working on for this Cotton Club thing.
So I was dipping in, and there I was at breakfast with Leopold Bloom, and I thought it was wonderful.
I didn't understand every illusion, but then again, I hadn't read that book in a long time.
If I sat down to read it from cover to cover again, I'm sure I would find it extraordinary and love it all over again.
I think it's a remarkable work that is infinitely rewarding to read if you care about it.
If he gets you at the first level where you care about the life of the Bloom family and Stephen,
You know, I don't think any nuance, any small detail, whether it's what he sees on the street or what he overhears, becomes unimportant or arcane.
I don't think it's... I don't think it's inaccessible.
Finnegan's Wake is something else.
That's a nice story.
I still have two more questions to wrap it up.
I had quite a lucky couple shots.
Something is steady or something.
Okay.
Do you feel pressured now by high critical expectations?
Actually, I don't.
I suppose I should, but I know some people get very skittish.
Maybe I'll get that way, but I don't feel that I'm there now.
I really feel that I'm... I can only write what I can write.
I can't do any better than I can do, and I'll be doing the best I can do whenever I sit down for the time writer.
I'm not going to try to overreach my own expectations.
The book I'm writing, Quinn's book, is
As I say, it's already two books.
It was going to be a book that would carry into the 20th century.
It got to be too long and unwieldy, artificial, and
The scope I was looking for, finally, was uninteresting to me.
All I had to do was write two chapters and prove to myself that this is really all I need.
I don't need the 20th century.
I've got the 19th century here, and that's more than I can handle in one book.
I think that what I'll do is... You know, and it's been a reduction like that.
It's a reduction to manageability.
I started off with great...
expansive plans narrowing down.
I don't really think that the critical expectation is worth worrying about.
I think that could ruin you if you worried yourself about what are they going to say about me next.
I think writers
him go silent, like Salinger, for instance.
What happened to him, but his response to the exterior world was certainly so significant that he had to go in isolation to get away from it.
And we have the example of Ralph Ellison, a marvelous writer.
It's been 32 years since we've had a piece of fiction from him, except little excerpts from this novel in progress, which promises to be a great book.
How long have you started to do some of these choice books?
He was also writing a book on the Korean War that he couldn't make work.
I think he's back to that one now.
But, as a matter of fact, I thought Sophie's Choice came out very fast.
Because when I interviewed him at one point about, what do you call it, the slave revolt, that turned his rebellion.
And I felt that...
I thought that was a terrific book.
And I felt that... I remember him saying that he was working on this book about the Korean War.
And then the next thing I know, how comes Sophie's Choice?
So he must have had Sophie's Choice on the shelf and then switched.
I guess finally I'll ask you one double-barrel question.
Number one, I think they related...
your evaluation of contemporary American fictionism among your contemporaries as you read?
Well, I've... I've been reading Updike's criticism and I think it's wonderful and hugging the shore.
I love Bellow.
I have liked very much a couple of novels by Cormac McCarthy, The Child of God and The Outer Dark.
Sounds to me like you're searching, though.
No, I mean, I'm... There's a lot of people I...
I'm reading George Conrad now for some pleasure in a book called The Loser.
He's Hungarian.
I'm reading Kunder as the unbearable likeness of being.
I think he's one of the best writers in a contemporary fictional scene.
I look forward to reading, what's his name, Mario Vargas Llosa's new novel, which I hear is excellent.
You made a pretty split between Americans and God Americans.
Yeah.
That's the way I've always been, I guess.
I've read a lot of Spanish literature.
It's the engineer of human souls.
Have you heard about this book?
I have not.
It's brand new.
It's the greatest book he's read.
It's very interesting.
It's an emigrant who's teaching
Cornell or some place in Canada.
He's teaching American.
He's in class.
This girl is not reading any work, but she's clearly plagiarized, but he's not going to pause a little bit.
It's very good.
I just started it.
The Engineer of Human Souls?
The Engineer of Human Souls, and it's attributed to Leonard.
That's what Leonard's definition of a writer was.
He's got an input.
I don't know.
Have you read Jane Ann Phillips?
No.
Well, I've heard really fine things about her.
She's got a new book out.
Oh, she's got a new book, yeah.
She wrote Black Tickets.
Isn't that great?
Right.
I have not read those stories.
I must read them.
But the new novel is exciting.
It's an actual story.
But it's been getting great news.
I've asked this about all the questions I want to, and I'd like to shoot a couple pictures of it, because I'll shut this off.
I'll ask you a question.
Sure.
About the MacArthur Award.
Oh, I'm sorry.
MacArthur.
That was the thing that really liberated me from the financial woe.
I had...
And from the need to work on anything in the academic world, I continue to be involved with the university here, despite that.
But I'm not teaching, not in a legal absence, but I'm not much involved with the university.
establishment of a writer's institute.
We didn't talk about that.
I don't know if you're interested.
I am interested in that.
Maybe we ought to sit down and talk about that.
Okay.
Just five minutes, maybe.
That's all.
Arthur is a key to what?
The writer's institute?
I designated $15,000 that goes with all the MacArthur fellows.
They will give it to a non-profit institution or to any institution where you choose to work.
And I gave it to SUNY with the hope that they would be able to use it to bring writers in to the English department.
And when the president, Vince O'Leary, heard about that, he said he would match it.
He said, we ought to do something to... It's 30.
It's 30, right?
Something large.
He said, think of it as large as you can.
And so...
I didn't want to come in and work in any way, whatever, so I designated a good friend of mine, Tom Smith, who teaches there, that he run the thing.
And, you know, I'm the ostensible director.
I mean, I've been involved in all the decision-making stuff since the thing happened, but it's now beginning to mushroom.
We're in our second year.
We got to 30, and now we have 60.
And when I got the Governor's Award from Cuomo in the Council on the Arts back in April, was it?
March.
A legislator from Greenwich Village, a fellow named Bill Passanante,
If you want to use him, his name is P-A-S-S-A-N-A-N-T-E.
He's an old-time legislator and very much involved with the arts.
And he said, why don't we have in the SUNY system a writer's program that matches Iowa?
And I said, I don't know why you don't.
He said, would you...
want to run it if we established it, and I'd hang out and be the director for a while and see what happens, get it off the ground anyway.
And so he went ahead and put out feelings to everybody, and everybody was terrifically enthusiastic about it, and we
last week saw the passage of the bill creating the New York State Writers Institute by both houses of the legislature.
Now it remains to be established.
It already existed.
I mean, we exist as an arm of the university, sort of an independent grant operation.
But we'll get more money now from the legislature.
Now, the MacArthur comes unsolicited and just comes out of the woodwork, right?
Absolutely.
Did you have any idea that you were in a writing for this?
A year and a half earlier I did, and somebody at this university mentioned it to me that I was a candidate, but nothing happened.
And some other writers got it that year, and a year and a half passed or so, and I...
I didn't really give it a second thought, and in the meantime they had been canvassing everybody, people at, other people at the university, people who I'd worked with in the council, people who I'd been with in Puerto Rico, magazine editors, book critics around the country.
And all that.
And then suddenly out of the blue came the word in January of 1983.
And they gave me the fellowship.
What does that do to you, I mean, in terms of allowing you to do things?
Well, I have five years tax-free, about $52,000 a year.
It escalates a little bit every year.
As you grow older, they add $800 to your benefit.
and you need health insurance with it and dental insurance.
You don't have to do anything.
It's that wonderful cushion of money that you can do anything with now.
It's like $100,000 a year, salary.
To do what you want to do.
Do what I want to do.
On top of that, you know, the books are making money of some sort, you know, not wildly, but, and then there's been the movie options, which tend to be profit.
And I'm writing the movie scripts.
So again, what do you make of all this?
Well, that's it, you see.
What am I supposed to say to that question?
That's the question I open with.
My answer is, I wish I knew.
My life hasn't changed substantially in that I'm doing anything really different.
I'm still working.
I was writing movies when I was broke.
I was writing novels when I was broke.
I was writing journalism when I was broke.
I was teaching when I was broke.
I'm still doing all those things, except I'm on a leave from teaching.
I'm...
I'm still living in the same place, the same friends, the same family.
The one thing is that I do travel a lot more now.
I'm going to New York more.
I'm going to Europe more.
Because all the books are coming out over there.
The books are coming out in seven countries.
And more next year.
I think that's about it.
The other thing was the...
We inaugurated the Writers' Institute in April, and he was our inaugural visitor, and he came and spoke to students, read some of his work with Q&A.
Is he rightly credited, though, with getting Ironweed published?
absolutely i mean without his letter i don't know what it took muscle in other words well what he did he wrote the letter which is pretty well known now he said it was a disgrace a book like billy phelan was the uh they would let it go out of print and he had not read ironweed at that time
And that they would let a writer like me go.
He just was very nice.
I hadn't seen him in 20 years.
But he had just finished reading Billy Phelan just before we met.
I was doing a piece on him for Esquire.
And he sat down and volunteered that letter.
Clark Smith was my editor, and he just called me up the next day and said, what do you think if we publish Ironweed in hardcover and bring out Billy and Legg?
What a reversal, I mean, to bring out all the books, not just accept Ironweed, but bring out the two earlier ones.
Well, he had...
The endorsement of Sorrow, which meant a lot to Viking.
He had already gone to Harpoon.
So it was just Bellow.
Bellow's Clout and Sorrow Horse.
And it was also Quark having been behind both Billy and Ironweed in the past.
He bought both of those books.
He was the editor.
Oh, he left and came back?
He was only going for three months, but that was long enough to scramble my intention.
They shipped in a new one from Georgia, didn't they?
Well, they didn't ship anybody in.
There was a girl who used to be an editor there part-time or something, and she would go to Georgia, and they would give her work to do on occasion.
George Higgins has had that problem, and it would be considered a definite problem of his last problem, the choice of one of his biggest complaints was that.
I think I had some editor out in Minnesota, some woman.
I don't know if you've read a new George Higgins.
I have.
I like Betty Coyle a lot.
This new one's good.
It's about politics.
It's beautiful.
But this editor, I guess, was so alien to his way of thinking and his way of writing, according to George, that a delayed publication of the book on the social media for a year.
I'm curious.
I know you're busy.
I've taken up quite a bit of your time.
Did you read The Rat on Fire?